Categorical data are called as Qualitative data and Numerical data is known as Quantitative data


1. Mean:-
  It is the average of the data given. It is basically useful when the data is basically symmetrical and shows one type of trends.
  
  -- summation(x)/n ; x is the each value and n is the total number of value
  * We can not rely on statistics when there is a skew in the data....
  
 2. Median:-
 It is also type of average when the data is skewed because of the outliners.
 If there are odd number of values , the median is one of the middle.
 If there are even number of values , the median is the sum of the two values and divide it by 2.
 
 3. Mode:-
 It is also type of an average where we have to choose the value having the highest frequency.
 If the data is having two clusters , report a mode for each group.
 It is the only type of average you can calculate for categorical data in the  mode.
 The data where there are two modes are known as bimodal.
 
 4. Range
 
 The range of the data is the difference between the upper bound and the lower bound of the data. The drawback of range is that it contains
 outliers thus it should be skewed data will not give the vlue properly.
 
 To solve this problem , we can divide the data into Quartiles, Quartiles are the value that spits your data into quarters. The lowest quartiles
 called the lowest quartiles and the highest called the upper quartiles.The middle one is called as median.
 
 Finding the positiion of the Quartile:
 To find the value of the lower quartile we can calculate it  by:-
 n/4
 To find the upper quartile:
 3n/4
 
 Interquartile range is the difference between the upper quartile and the lower quartile.
 
 *Percentiles:-
 Percentiles are the values that split your data into percentage .
 
How to find the percentiles:-
i> First of all kept the values in ascending order.
ii> To find the position of kth percentile out of n nnumbers , start off by calculating k*(n/100)
iii> If this gives you a interger, then your percentile is half way between the value at position k*(n/100) and the next number.Take the average of the numbers at these two position will give you the percentile.
If it is not integer then round it up, it will give you the percentile.


**Box and whisker plot let you visualize ranges:
It is a useful way of showing ranges and quartiline on the chart . A box will show where the quartiline and inter quartile ranges are, and the 
whiskers give  you the upper and lower bounds . More than one set of data can be shown on the same chart, they can be shown on the same chart
, so they are useful for comparision.

5. Variance:
 It is a way of measuring spread , and it is the average of the distance values for the mean squared.
 
 summation(x-mean)^2/n  x is the each value and n is the total number of value
 
 6.Standard deviation:
  Square root of the variance.
  The smaller the value of standard deviation, the closer the value to the mean.
  
  squareroot(variance)
  
  **Other way to find the variance:
  summation(x^2)/n -mean^2
  
  7. Standard scores:-
  It is the way of compairing values across different set of data where the means and standard deviation are different.
  
  z=(x-mean)/variance
  Number of standard deviation from the mean.
  

 
 
 
